[DOCS] Adding new page for restore snapshot API (#59937)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/snapshot-restore/apis/restore-snapshot-api.asciidoc

{
  "type": "fs",
  "settings": {
    "location": "my_backup_location"
  }
}

PUT /_snapshot/my_repository/my_snapshot?wait_for_completion=true

PUT /index_1

PUT /index_2

PUT /index_3

PUT /index_4

PUT _snapshot/my_repository/snapshot_2?wait_for_completion=true
{
  "indices": "index_3,index_4",
  "ignore_unavailable": true,
  "include_global_state": false,
  "metadata": {
    "taken_by": "Elastic Machine",
    "taken_because": "backup testing"
  }
}

POST /index_1/_close

POST /index_2/_close

POST /index_3/_close

POST /index_4/_close

----
// TESTSETUP
////

[source,console]
----
POST /_snapshot/my_repository/my_snapshot/_restore
----
// TEST[s/_restore/_restore?wait_for_completion=true/]

[[restore-snapshot-api-request]]
==== {api-request-title}

`POST /_snapshot/<repository>/<snapshot>`

[[restore-snapshot-api-desc]]
==== {api-description-title}

Use the restore snapshot API to restore a snapshot of a cluster, including all data streams and indices in the snapshot. If you do not want to restore the entire snapshot, you can select specific data streams or indices to restore.

NOTE: You cannot restore a data stream if a stream with the same name already
exists.

> You can run the restore operation only on a functioning cluster. Existing indices can only be restored if they are <<indices-close,closed>> and have the same number of shards as the indices in the snapshot. The restore operation automatically opens restored indices if they were closed and creates new indices if they do not exist in the cluster.

Reviewer: > You can run the restore operation only on a functioning cluster.

`functioning` is a little vague here. Does this mean the cluster is running? Green health status? Both?

Author: I believe that it's any _running_ cluster. @original-brownbear, is there also a limitation on the cluster health?

Reviewer 2: The health of the cluster is not relevant but you do need to at least have an elected master node as well as enough data nodes to handle what you are planning on restoring. I think I'd just drop the `functioning` from this sentence and be done with it. If you don't have a running master then you don't really have a cluster I guess :)

Author: Thanks for the clarification @original-brownbear. I think that adding some more precise language here is helpful. 
>You can run the restore operation on a cluster that contains an elected
primary node and has data nodes with enough capacity to accommodate the snapshot
you are restoring.

Reviewer 2: @lockewritesdocs that's ok as well, just make it `an elected master node` instead of `primary` and it's correct :)

Author: @original-brownbear, as part of the effort to introduce neutral naming, we're trying to provide alternatives to terms like `master` and `slave`. That's why I suggested `elected primary node` instead of `elected master node`.

Reviewer 2: I think we can't adjust terminology here yet :( Especially not to "primary" as we use "primary" in the context of primary and replica shards. We'll have to adjust naming here once we renamed the actual piece of functionality I'm afraid.

Reviewer: I agree with @original-brownbear.

Here, `master` node refers to an actual setting for the node in ES:
https://www.elastic.co/guide/en/elasticsearch/reference/master/modules-node.html#dedicated-master-node

I don't feel we can change this or other remaining master node references until that setting is changed. Otherwise, it could be very confusing for users.

FWIW I feel renaming this is important and it's being worked on, but the product needs to make this change first.

If a data stream is restored, its backing indices are also restored. However, restored backing indices are not automatically
added to any existing data streams. For example, if only the

> `.ds-logs-000003` backing index is restored from a snapshot, it is not automatically added to the existing `logs` data stream.

Reviewer: This paragraph is a bit confusing and seems to conflate two ideas.

You can restore an entire data stream. This also restores the stream's backing indices.

Separately, you can also restore _individual_ backing indices without restoring an entire data stream. However, these restored backing indices are treated as regular indices. They aren't auto-added to any existing data stream.

Author: Thanks for clarifying this distinction @jrodewig. I think that this rendition explains the difference better:

> If a data stream is restored, its backing indices are also restored. Alternatively, you can restore individual backing indices without restoring an entire data stream. If you restore individual backing indices, they are not automatically added to any existing data stream. For example, if only the `.ds-logs-00003` backing index is restored from a snapshot, it is not automatically added to the existing `logs` data stream.

include::{es-ref-dir}/snapshot-restore/restore-snapshot.asciidoc[tag=index-settings-data-stream-warning]

[[restore-snapshot-api-path-params]]
==== {api-path-parms-title}

`<repository>`::
(Required, string)
Name of the repository to restore a snapshot from.

`<snapshot>`::
(Required, string)

> Name of the snapshot to restore. This name must be unique in the snapshot repository.

Reviewer: > This name must be unique in the snapshot repository.

I think this is more relevant for a write action than a read action. Probably not needed here.

[role="child-attributes"]
[[restore-snapshot-api-request-body]]
==== {api-request-body-title}

`ignore_index_settings`::
(Optional, string)

> A comma-separated list of index settings and index settings groups that should not be restored from a snapshot.

Reviewer: >  and index settings groups

I've not seen this phrase elsewhere. Not sure what it means. Maybe explain in separate sentence?

Author: I believe this setting just allows you to list index settings to ignore, which can be a single setting or a group of settings. To clarify, I think this version works better:
>A comma-separated list of index settings that should not be restored from a snapshot.

Reviewer: 👍  Yep. That works better. Thanks!

> A comma-separated list of index settings and index settings groups that should not be restored from a snapshot.

Reviewer: I'd drop the article.
```suggestion
Comma-separated list of index settings and index settings groups that should not be restored from a snapshot.
```

`include_aliases`::
(Optional, boolean)

> If `true`, aliases from the original snapshot will be restored.

Reviewer: We should explicitly use `index alias` on first mention. There are field aliases too, which could lead to confusion.

I'd also avoid future tense if possible.
```suggestion
If `true`, index aliases from the original snapshot are restored.
```

Defaults to `true`.
+
If `false`, prevents aliases from being restored together with associated

> indices.

Reviewer: > If `false`, prevents aliases from being restored together with associated
> indices.

I don't think you need this sentence. First para is pretty clear.

[[restore-snapshot-api-include-global-state]]
`include_global_state`::
+
--
(Optional, boolean)
If `false`, the cluster state is not restored. Defaults to `false`.

If `true`, the current cluster state is included in the restore operation.

The cluster state includes:

* Persistent cluster settings
* Index templates
* Legacy index templates
* Ingest pipelines
* {ilm-init} lifecycle policies
--
+

> IMPORTANT: By default, the entire restore operation will fail if one or more indices included in the snapshot do not have all primary shards available. You can change this behavior by setting <<restore-snapshot-api-partial,`partial`>> to `true`.

Reviewer: I'm not sure how this relates to the `include_global_state` param.

It's also not clear that the primary shards have to be available _when the snapshot_ is taken. As-is, it could be read as meaning an existing index needs to have its primary shards available.

[[restore-snapshot-api-index-settings]]
`index_settings`::
(Optional, string)

> A comma-separated list of settings to add or change in all restored indices. Use this parameter to override index settings when restoring snapshots.

Reviewer: I'd drop the article here.
```suggestion
Comma-separated list of <<index-modules,index settings>> to add or change in restored indices. Use this parameter to override index settings when restoring snapshots.
```

+

> For data streams, these index settings are applied to the restored backing
> indices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For data streams, these index settings are applied to the stream's restored backing
indices.
```

+
For more information regarding all the different index-level settings
that you can specify, see

> <<index-modules,index modules>>.

Reviewer: I'd drop this para. I think an inline link in the first sentence will suffice.

`indices`::
(Optional, string)

> A comma-separated list of data streams and indices to restore from the snapshot.
> <<multi-index,Multi-index syntax>> is supported.

Reviewer: Drop the article. `Multi-index syntax` is now `multi-target syntax` (to include data streams).
```suggestion
Comma-separated list of data streams and indices to restore from the snapshot.
<<multi-index,Multi-target syntax>> is supported.
```

+
By default, a restore operation includes all data streams and indices in the snapshot. If this

> argument is provided, the restore operation only includes the specified data streams and indices.

Reviewer: The second sentence here kind of repeats the first on in the def. Maybe:

`If no argument is specified, all data streams and indices in the snapshot are restored.`

[[restore-snapshot-api-partial]]
`partial`::
(Optional, boolean)

> If `false`, the entire restore operation will fail if one or more indices included in the snapshot do not have all primary shards available. Defaults to `false`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `false`, the restore operation fails if one or more indices in the snapshot do not have all primary shards available. Defaults to `false`.
```

+

> If `true`, allows restoring a partial snapshot of indices with unavailable shards. Only shards that were successfully included in the snapshot
> will be restored. All missing shards will be recreated as empty.

Reviewer: I think you can drop most of the first sentence here.
```suggestion
If `true`, only shards that were successfully included in the snapshot
will be restored. All missing shards will be recreated as empty.
```

[[restore-snapshot-api-rename-pattern]]
`rename_pattern`::
(Optional, string)
Defines a rename pattern to apply to restored data streams and indices. Data streams and indices matching the rename pattern will be renamed according to

> <<restore-snapshot-api-rename-replacement,`rename_replacement`>>.

Reviewer: This pattern is used to match the name of data streams and indices in the snapshot. That's not clear here.

I also think we're better off referring to this as a `regular expression` than introducing `rename pattern` as a new noun/concept.

+
The rename pattern is applied as defined by the regular expression that
supports referencing the original text, according to the https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/regex/Matcher.html#appendReplacement-java.lang.StringBuffer-java.lang.String-[`appendReplacement`] logic.
+
The request will fail if two or more data streams or indices will be renamed into the same name.
+
include::{es-ref-dir}/snapshot-restore/restore-snapshot.asciidoc[tag=rename-restored-data-stream-tag]

[[restore-snapshot-api-rename-replacement]]
`rename_replacement`::
(Optional, string)

> Defines the rename replacement string. See <<restore-snapshot-api-rename-pattern,`rename_pattern`>> for more information.

Reviewer: Some things that are missing or not clear here:

* This string is used to rename data streams and indices in the snapshot that match the `rename_pattern`.
* This string supports capture groups from the `rename_pattern` param. You should also note what that syntax is.

`wait_for_completion`::
(Optional, boolean)

> If `true`, the request returns a response when the restore operation
> completes.
> +
> If `false`, the request returns a response when the restore operation initializes.
> Defaults to `false`.

Reviewer: I'd flip the order so it matches your earlier params (like `partial`).
```suggestion
If `false`, the request returns a response when the restore operation initializes.
Defaults to `false`.
+
If `true`, the request returns a response when the restore operation
completes.
```

[[restore-snapshot-api-example]]
==== {api-examples-title}

> The following request restores `index_1` and `index_2` from `snapshot_2`. The `rename_pattern` parameter indicates that any index matching the regex pattern `index_(.+)` will be renamed using the pattern `restored_index_$1`, which is defined by the `rename_replacement` parameter.

Reviewer: `regex pattern` -> `regular expression`
```suggestion
The following request restores `index_1` and `index_2` from `snapshot_2`. The `rename_pattern` and `rename_replacement` parameters indicate any index matching the regular expression `index_(.+)` will be renamed using the pattern `restored_index_$1` when restored.
```

> For example, `index_1` will be renamed to `restored_index_1` and `index_2` will be renamed to `restored_index_2`.

Reviewer: I'd split the sentences.
```suggestion
For example, `index_1` will be renamed to `restored_index_1`. `index_2` will be renamed to `restored_index_2`.
```

[source,console]
----
POST /_snapshot/my_repository/snapshot_2/_restore?wait_for_completion=true
{
  "indices": "index_1,index_2",
  "ignore_unavailable": true,
  "include_global_state": false,
  "rename_pattern": "index_(.+)",
  "rename_replacement": "restored_index_$1",
  "include_aliases": false
}
----

The API returns an acknowledgement if the request succeeds. If the request encounters errors, the response indicates any issues found, such as
open indices that are blocking the restore operation from completing.

> For example, the following error indicates that `snapshot_2` cannot be restored because an open index with the same name (`restored_index_2`) already exists in the cluster.
> 
> [source,console-result]
> ----
> {
>   "error" : {
>     "root_cause" : [
>       {
>         "type" : "snapshot_restore_exception",
>         "reason" : "[my_repository:snapshot_2/0LIMUElxQkyRoimBDAkYIQ]
>         cannot restore index [restored_index_2] because an open index
>         with same name already exists in the cluster. Either close or
>         delete the existing index or restore the index under a different
>         name by providing a rename pattern and replacement name"
>       }
>     ],
>     "type" : "snapshot_restore_exception",
>     "reason" : "[my_respository:snapshot_2/0LIMUElxQkyRoimBDAkYIQ]
>     cannot restore index [restored_index_2] because an open index
>     with same name already exists in the cluster. Either close or
>     delete the existing index or restore the index under a different
>     name by providing a rename pattern and replacement name"
>   },
>   "status" : 500
> }
> ----
> // TEST[skip:example only]

Reviewer: I'd drop this portion of the example.

With a few exceptions, we don't document error messages. Two reasons:

1. Errors aren't typically an outcome any user wants. It's usually more helpful to document ways to prevent errors in the first place.

2. If the error message changes, we have no way of catching that in these docs. Because you skipped the response here, no CI failure would be raised. That's not the case for most requests/responses.

For example, if a response added a new property, engineers would need to update any existing doc snippets containing that response to include the new property. Otherwise the CI would fail on their PR.
Skipping tests generally undermines that system.

```suggestion
```

Author: Thanks for the context James. I was uncertain about adding the error message and whether it would create more ambiguity. My thoughts were to provide some insight into a common error that users might see, but I agree with your assessment regarding broken CI builds. I'll remove the highlighted section.
